---
layout: state
id: in-mp
title: Madhya Pradesh
region: asia
country: in
published: true
---

Madhya Pradesh, located in central India, is one of the most agriculture-intensive states in the country. Madhya Pradesh saw a 5.6% growth in peak power demand in 2016. Installed renewable electricity capacity of 3,383MW accounted for just under 15% of the state’s total of 22,768MW. The state almost doubled its wind capacity in 2016 from 1,126MW to 2,289MW, similar to what it achieved in 2015 – from 567MW to 1,126MW. This reflected the rush among wind power developers to commission plants before the expiry of the 2013-2016 feed-in-tariff of 5.92 rupees per kWh ($9 cents).

The wind feed in tariff was reduced in April 2016 to 4.78 rupees per kWh ($7 cents). The decrease in the tariffs resulted in diminished developer interest in the state. India had its first auction for wind projects in February 2017, and the state is expected to follow the same route for award of future  projects. In solar, 161MW was added in 2016. This took the state’s total grid-connected solar capacity to 840MW.

Madhya Pradesh’s share of the 175GW renewable energy target by 2022 announced by the federal government is 5,675MW of solar, 6,200MW of wind, 118MW of biomass and 25MW of small hydro power. In 2015, the state finalized its net metering policy, which provides incentives to consumers to install rooftop solar PV systems. The policy introduced exemptions to enable banking (whereby power producers can virtually ‘bank’ or store power in the grid) and wheeling (transmission). It is expected to propel the growth of the rooftop solar sector.

The land availability and acquisition issues that have hampered growth of renewables in certain other states do not pose major concerns for project developers in Madhya Pradesh. The state leases government land at a token fee of 1 rupee($0.015) per year, which has made Madhya Pradesh one of the most attractive places in the country for solar developers. Favorable land policy and a single window for project clearance has resulted in faster project commissioning. In early 2016, the World Bank’s International Finance Corporation partnered with the government of Madhya Pradesh and the Solar Energy Corporation of India to set up a 750MW ‘Ultra mega solar power’ project, which was advertised as the world’s largest single-site solar project. This project will be the first power project to conduct inter-state sale of solar power to the Delhi metro transport system.

Out of the three Madhya Pradesh DISCOMs, Madhya Pradesh Paschim Kshetra Vidyut Vitaran Company Ltd  (MPPKVVCL) has been rated B+, up from B in 2016. Out of the other two DISCOMs, MPPKVVCL has retained a rating of B, and MPMKVVCL’s rating declined to C+ from B last year. Despite the recent rapid deployment of new renewable energy capacity in the state, the poor health of its distribution utilities resulted in payment delays to wind power developers of up to six months. In August 2016, Madhya Pradesh signed up to the federal government’s distribution utility debt restructuring scheme, Ujwal Discom Assurance Yojna (UDAY). This is expected to provide short-term financial relief to the distribution companies. Their long-term turnaround, however, will depend on their ability to reduce distribution losses and improve bill collection efficiencies.

The state has made good progress in rural electrification, as per the federal government’s definition of electrification, which considers a village to be electrified if 10% of households have power. As on 30 June 2017, out of 11.37 million households, 6.8 million households had been electrified, leading to a household electrification rate of 59.8%. Under the central government scheme called ‘Power for all’, the state intends to cover the entire state under in a phased manner and provide 24x7 power supply to all domestic, industrial and commercial consumers for all connected households by FY19. Madhya Pradesh is one of the three states which has issued draft regulations for aligning Renewable Purchase Obligations. The state plans to have a 10.25% Non-solar RPO and a 6.75% solar RPO by 2018-19.
