---
layout: state
id: in-up
title: Uttar Pradesh
region: asia
country: in
published: true
---
Uttar Pradesh, with a population of over 200 million, is India’s most populous state. The power shortage in the state, defined as the gap between maximum demand and availability, was 6.2% during 2016-17. The state has historically been India’s largest sugarcane producer and therefore a considerable share (8%) of its installed capacity is biomass and waste-fired. In 2016, the state added 30MW of biomass and waste, taking the total installed capacity of such generating units in the state to 2,022MW. These have a relatively low capacity utilization factor and mostly generate power only for a quarter of the year because of a lack of feedstock.

There is growing interest in utility-scale solar PV in the state. Uttar Pradesh saw year-on-year growth of 70% in solar energy capacity in 2016. Total grid-connected installed solar capacity at the end of December 2016 was 239MW, up from 140MW at the end of December 2015. The federal government of India targets 175GW of renewable energy capacity by 2022. Of this, the state’s share is 10.6GW of solar power, 3.5GW of biomass power and 25MW of small hydro capacity. These targets, and the growing mandatory renewable energy purchase obligations of the state electricity distribution companies, are expected to drive the long-term growth of renewables, particularly solar energy, in the state.

There is no VAT or entry tax on solar energy equipment and products in the state. In addition, there are stamp duty concessions and no wheeling (transmission) charges for solar energy. The state also provides transmission infrastructure support by bearing the cost of extending the network to solar power projects installed in the Bundelkhand region of the state. In the past, the structure of power purchase agreements signed with state power utilities was a concern for the developers and resulted in high project bids by developers. In March 2016, there was interest in the Solar Energy Corporation of India tenders under the Viability Gap Funding scheme at a scheme bid price of 4.43 rupees per kWh ($6.62 cents). Currently, Uttar Pradesh is also looking to acquire 750MW of solar power from a project located in the neighboring state of Rajasthan at no additional charges as the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has exempted solar and wind power projects from inter-state and wheeling charges.

The financial health of the state power distribution companies is among the worst in the country. Ratings released in May 2017 by the Ministry of Power indicate poor financial health of the Discoms which has resulted in payment delays to conventional energy generators in the past and remains a key concern for new project developers. Uttar Pradesh has some of the lowest levels of rural household electrification in the country, with around 14.9 million rural households  lacking access to electricity as of August 2017. Rural electrification efforts in the state are underway through grid extension as well as off-grid technologies.

The lack of reliable power in rural areas has created an opportunity for installation of mini-grids, and many have been deployed, often with the support of domestic and international grants. In early 2016, Uttar Pradesh became the first state in India to adopt a mini-grid policy. It was also the first state in India to set-up state-sponsored mini-grid projects through competitive bidding.
