---
layout: country
id: bz
title: Belize
region: lac
grid: 'on'
published: true
---

Belize has Latin America’s smallest economy, with tourism and commodities exports as its primary industries. In 2016, 55% of its 155MW domestic grid capacity was represented by small hydro and biomass and waste power. Belize relies on imported power from Mexico to meet its electricity demand. Around 40% of the electricity the nation consumes every year comes from the neighbor country. 

The Belize electricity market is controlled by Belize Electricity Limited (BEL), the sole transmission and distribution company. In 2016, most domestic power was generated by independent power producers and sold to BEL. In 2012, the government established the Ministry of Energy, Science & Technology and Public Utilities to integrate energy, science and technology into national development planning and decision-making. The Public Utilities Commission (PUC) regulates all entities involved in the generation and supply of electricity and oversees rates and regulation.

In 2015, oil and diesel accounted for 68.5MW of total capacity, followed by small hydro (54.3MW), biomass and waste (31.5MW) and solar (0.5MW). The national electricity grid is connected to Mexico’s. BEL’s supply from Mexico’s national utility Comisión Federal de Electricidad is constrained by the capacity of the 115kV transmission line linking the two national systems. 

In 2011, the government released its National Energy Policy (NEP), which set goals to foster sustainable production and distribution of energy, minimize the cost of energy in the local economy, mitigate the impacts of external shocks and create a national culture of energy efficiency.

On October 1, 2015, the government of Belize submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to the United Nations, in which it committed to increase the share of renewable energy in its electricity mix by 85% by 2027. It also committed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 62% compared with a business-as-usual scenario. The contribution will be conducted through Belize’s Sustainable Energy Action Plan 2014–2033, which aims to reduce the country’s greenhouse gas emissions and improve energy efficiency and 
conservation.

Belize held its first tender in 2013. It aimed to contract 75MW of power, of which 60MW was open to bidders across all energy sources, while 15MW was reserved exclusively for solar and wind. By June 2014, PUC had received 22 bid submissions, and 20 were approved for the next step. On March 6, 2015, PUC chose a few projects for further negotiations. Among these were two small hydro projects, with a combined capacity of 21.8MW. As of May 2017, there was no further information about whether contracts had been signed between BEL and the respective bidders.


###Score summary

Belize scored 1.13 in Climatescope 2016, up from 0.81 the year before. It gained one place to rank 37<sup>th</sup> on the list of countries overall, and its best performance was on Enabling Framework Parameter I.

The country’s score on Parameter I improved and it jumped thirteen places to rank 14<sup>th</sup>. Supportive aspects of its policy and regulatory environment include availability of finance and establishment of a national energy target.

Belize’s score on Clean Energy Investment and Climate Financing Parameter II more than doubled to 0.56, and it rose sixteen places to 28<sup>th</sup>, despite the absence of any investment in the sector since 2010. The average cost of debt was relatively low at 10.3% in 2015. 

The country’s weakest performance was on Low-Carbon Business & Clean Energy Value Chains Parameter III. It scored 0.46, unchanged from the previous year, and took 55<sup>th</sup> place, reflecting the scarcity of clean energy companies.

On Greenhouse Gas Management Activities Parameter IV, it ranked 34<sup>th</sup>, scoring strongly in the Carbon Offsets category but poorly on carbon policy.
