---
layout: country
id: bw
title: Botswana
region: africa
grid: 'off'
published: true
---

The power sector in Botswana is dominated by coal, which accounts for 79% of the current installed capacity. By contrast, solar currently accounts for just 0.1%. Whilst the solar potential remains untapped, the country is also sitting on coal reserves of around 212 billion metric tons, which also remains largely unexploited. Despite this resource abundance, Botswana relies heavily on power from expensive back-up diesel plants and electricity imports. Whilst policy frameworks are still lacking, including the National Energy Policy, which has been in draft form since October 2009, a number of important developments occurred in 2016 – including the passing of the Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority Act. 

Botswana’s Energy Regulatory Authority (BERA) is responsible for economic regulation of the energy supply and services, as well as ensuring financial sustainability across the energy sector. BERA is also responsible for maintaining service standards, regulating tariffs, distributing licenses and facilitating private sector entry. The Department of Energy within the Ministry of Minerals, Green Technology and Energy Security (MMGE) is responsible for formulating and implementing national energy policy and programmes, while the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) holds a monopoly over generation, transmission and distribution. Power prices are suppressed, which puts BPC under financial stress. In December 2007, the Electricity Supply Act of 1973 was amended to allow for independent power producers (IPPs). Currently, the only active IPP in Botswana is a 35MW temporary diesel plant that BPC rents (24-month contract) from Alstom Power Rentals. 
In 2010, the government introduced the National Electricity Standard Connection Cost (NESC) and the National Electrification Fund (NEF), which eases the upfront electricity connection costs. This allows Botswana to boast impressive electrification rates compared with its neighbors, with over 72% of the rural population having access to electricity as of 2016. 

In 2016, a joint venture between Marubeni and Posco won a tender to build the 300MW Morupule B expansion project, which will be the first IPP-operated plant in Botswana. Construction was due to start in January 2017, but was delayed after the joint venture demanded an $800 million sovereign guarantee from government due to concerns that BPC would default on payments. The power plant is expected to be operational by 2020.

The current nameplate installed capacity in Botswana is 927MW, which exceeds the 2016 peak demand of 610MW. However, with half of coal-fired power station Morupule B’s operating capacity down, and Morupule A undergoing refurbishment, the effective capacity is just 530MW. This includes high-cost diesel plants: Matshelagabedi (70MW) and Orapa (90MW). To make up the shortfall, Botswana draws power from its neighbors, putting its energy security at risk. Botswana’s net electricity imports for 2016 were about 1.6TWh – the bulk of which came from Eskom in South Africa, a country that has struggled to meet its own demand in recent years. If the government is to achieve its objective of Botswana becoming a net exporter of power, both solar and coal resources will need to be exploited.

In 2013, a bankable feasibility study recommended a 100MW solar thermal plant be constructed in Jwaneng. In May 2017 BPC, in conjunction with the MMGE, published an expression of interest (EOI) for an IPP to construct, commission, own and operate a 100MW solar plant. However, it is unlikely that this will be taken any further, considering that the previous 2 x 50MW solar plant EOI floated in 2015 by the MMGE, which received 118 bids, did not progress any further. In the off-grid space, there are approximately 600 decentralized PV systems across the country with an aggregated capacity of 1.26MW. However, the majority of these systems are no longer operational due to poor quality and lack of maintenance. 

Feed-in tariffs have also been considered, but have not yet been implemented due to limited technical capacity, a focus on coal expansion and the potential cost. Botswana’s Manufacturing Investment Incentive and Import Duty Exemption provide limited policy support for renewable energy investment in the country. Still, a 1.3MW PV plant financed through a Japanese grant in 2012 remains to date the only renewable grid-connected plant. In addition to the National Energy Policy, the Renewable Energy Strategy, which is receiving technical assistance from the World Bank, is expected to be finalised by July 2017.

The government of Botswana submitted Botswana’s National Determined Contribution (NDC) in October 2015, listing set of mitigation and adaption activities, that would result in a 15% overall emissions reduction by 2030, compared to 2010 levels. The absolute target, which covers the energy (mobile and stationary sources), waste, and agriculture sectors, was later ratified in November 2016. 

