---
layout: country
id: sv
title: El Salvador
region: lac
grid: 'on'
published: true
---

El Salvador’s National Energy Policy aims to diversify its power matrix and reduce its oil dependency by adding more renewable capacity. The country conducts technology-specific renewable energy tenders and offers income and import tax exemptions to clean energy projects.

With 1.7GW of installed capacity in 2015, oil, hydro and geothermal are El Salvador’s main sources of electricity. Out of the 5.5TWh produced that year, 43% came from oil-based generation, 24% from hydro and 26% from geothermal. The remaining power was generated by biomass plants.
The National Energy Council (Comisión Nacional de Energía) oversees the electricity sector in the country, while the Superintendencia General de Electricidad y Telecomunicaciones is the power sector regulator. State-owned Empresa Transmisora de El Salvador (ETESAL) is charged with transmission and Unidad de Transacciones regulates the wholesale power market and acts as the system operator. El Salvador is also part of the Central American Electrical Interconnected System and is connected to Guatemala and Honduras by 286km of transmission lines.

El Salvador’s power market has been unbundled and generation is open to private operators. Around 13 independent power producers are active. One of the largest generators in the country is LaGeo, which initially was a joint-venture between Enel Green Power and El Salvador’s state-owned Inversiones Energeticas. After a long litigation process, El Salvador will acquire Enel Green’s stake in the project (36.2%) and will become the single owner of LaGeo.

Tenders have been introduced to replace expiring bilateral power agreements and encourage renewable energy contracts. The first auction for renewable capacity took place in 2014, and contracted 94MW of solar PV capacity that is expected to come online in 2016. Capacity was contracted at an average price of $116.2 per MWh under 20-year power purchase agreements. In February 2016, the bidding in a second renewable energy tender opened. It aimed to contract up to 150MW of wind and solar PV projects for maximum duration of 20 years from 2019.
 
Under decree 462 of 2007, El Salvador grants tax incentives for development of renewable energy sources, including 10 years of import tax exemption to machines and equipment, and income tax breaks for renewable energy projects. Additionally, the sale of credits under the UN’s Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) for renewable energy projects is not subject to income tax. Furthermore, ETESAL is required to guarantee priority dispatch to electricity generated from renewable sources.


### Score summary

El Salvador scored 1.26 in Climatescope 2016, an increase of 0.23 on its score in the 2015 survey. It placed 33<sup>rd</sup> overall, down three from its position the previous year, and was strongest on Enabling Framework Parameter I. 

Its score on Parameter I increased to 1.82 from 1.27, and it gained eleven places to 12<sup>th</sup> position. This was driven by installation of 486MW of new clean energy generating capacity, and higher marks on its clean energy policy indicator.

El Salvador’s score on Clean Energy Investment and Climate Financing Parameter II fell, and it dropped fourteen places to 35<sup>th</sup>. Nevertheless, new investment of $89.1m was recorded in 2015, $79.9m of which financed biomass and waste-to-energy projects. 

On Low-Carbon Business & Clean Energy Value Chains Parameter III, the country’s score was unchanged at 1.22, which put it in 40<sup>th</sup> place, down four from 2015. There was a handful of manufacturers and developers present. 

On Greenhouse Gas Management Activities Parameter IV, El Salvador saw its score rise, but it ranked a relatively lowly 41<sup>st</sup>. It is engaged in some Carbon Offsets projects, yet has no carbon policies.
