---
layout: country
id: ge
title: Georgia
grid: 'on'
published: true
region: africa
---

Georgia, a former Soviet Republic, is reforming its energy sector to comply with the standards of the European Union, and the EU Energy Community. That would mean more market-based pricing, energy efficiency and renewable action plans for the country nestled in the mountainous Caucasus region of Eurasia, bordering Russia to the north, and Turkey, Armenia, and Azerbaijan to the south. Overwhelming reliance on hydropower is the defining characteristic of Georgia’s energy sector. Electricity consumption is rising at a swift pace – 3.2% CAGR since 2006 – despite the two frozen conflict zones. The government hopes the healthy electricity demand, as well as transparency and competition, will allow it to attract the necessary investments to this sector.

Over 80% of Georgia’s electricity currently comes from hydro resources, and the government sees vast potential for further hydropower development. It is estimated that only 20% of Georgia’s total hydropower resource is currently utilized. Incentives have been introduced in the form of negotiated feed-in-tariffs for renewable energy, pre-selection of project sites for hydro power is on offer and a state-owned, renewable energy focused Georgian Energy Development Fund has been set up.

The country’s reliance on hydropower poses a challenge in maintaining seasonal resource adequacy. Peak electric demand in Georgia occurs in the winter when hydro reserves happen to be at their lowest levels. This is a major impetus behind the government’s support for three gas-fired generation assets, as well as the planned expansion of solar and wind power, from only one 20MW wind farm today, as well as the growth of international interconnection capacity. Georgia already has a high level of interconnection with its neighbors, mainly for resource adequacy, but it is also looking to export cheap, clean hydropower during the spring and summer months. Georgia looks westward especially, via Turkey, as it grows its energy markets with European integration in mind.
Nearly 100% of the Georgian population has access to electricity, which is procured through a mix of regulated direct contracts and a residual wholesale market, where only 12% of the total electricity generated passes. The current power market is changing under a brisk timeline – Georgia will begin deregulation of existing assets and have a new market structure in place by the end of the decade. Currently, the generators in the market are a mix of large regulated and small deregulated entities, totaling 40 individual generating companies. All units built post-2008, and under 13MW, are deregulated, but the rest (typically larger hydro units) operate under regulated-tariffs that are negotiated with the government.

Electricity is distributed and sold by three private, regional monopolies. The Georgian energy regulator (GNERC) introduced in November 2016 new direction on retail net metering: distributed generation is now paid the retail rate until a customer’s generation exceeds consumption on an annual basis, at which point customers are paid a wholesale rate for the excess. In 2016, residential retail rates averaged approximately 144 Georgian lari per megawatt hour, while spot wholesale priced averaged about 107 lari per megawatt hour.

Georgia’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC states that the country aims for a 15% emissions reduction below business-as-usual by 2030 (equivalent to a 34% reduction in emission intensity). The INDC covers energy, industrial processes and product use, agriculture, and waste.