---
layout: country
id: sr
title: Suriname
region: lac
grid: 'on'
published: true
---

Suriname has considerable potential for clean energy, given its large water reserves and high levels of solar irradiation, but with low power prices and no policy framework, there has been little incentive to develop renewable energy projects in the country.
Suriname’s electricity market is controlled by state-owned Energiebedrijven Suriname (EBS), a utility that controls transmission, distribution and 41% of the country’s generation. The remaining share is generated by the state-owned oil company, Staatsolie and a private mining company, Suralco.

Staatsolie is responsible for the extraction, refining and sale of petroleum products in Suriname and was established in 1990 by the Petroleum Law. Foreign investors are allowed to conduct petroleum exploration and production through partnership agreements with Staatsolie. In 2014, 10 international oil companies were exploring Suriname’s offshore oil reserves.
In 2015, Suriname’s generation matrix represented 503MW of installed capacity divided between thermal (oil and diesel) and large hydro power. All the large hydro capacity comes from the Afobaka hydro plant, the property of Suralco, with 189MW of capacity. Around 85% of Suriname’s 500,000 people are connected to the grid. They pay an average of $0.04/kWh, the second lowest tariff in Latin America and the Caribbean thanks to government subsidies.

Suriname’s lack of legislation for clean energy and the low power prices are the main barriers to development of renewable energy projects in the country. The development of renewables has been led by large consumers. The first renewable energy large scale plant, a 5MW solar plant, was commissioned in December 2014 and is supplying power to a gold mine (IAMGold Rosebel gold mine) in Brokopondo district.

On 5 December 2012, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) announced a USD 15m loan for Suriname’s power sector reform. One of the outcomes will be the Suriname’s Green Paper, which would focus on an integrated policy and regulatory energy framework. As of October 2016, it had not been released. On 18 December 2014, IDB announced a USD 33m loan to EBS, which aims to contribute to the sustainability of the power sector in Suriname by supporting EBS’ operation and performance; expanding reliable electricity coverage; and upgrading the power infrastructure.


###Score summary

Suriname scored 0.55 in Climatescope 2016 (an increase of 0.33), which placed it last, or 58<sup>th</sup>  on the list of countries. Its best performance was on Clean Energy Investment and Climate Financing Parameter II, the only area in which it placed higher than 50<sup>th</sup>.

The country took the 50<sup>th</sup> spot on Enabling Framework Parameter I, up four places from the year before. One of its few positive attributes was the presence of a clean energy rural electrification programme. 

Suriname ranked 41<sup>st</sup> on Parameter II. From 2011 to 2015, investment of just $13m was recorded, while the average cost of debt was 12.62% in 2015.
 
On Low-Carbon Business & Clean Energy Value Chains Parameter III, the country scored 0.20, which was unchanged from the year before. It took 57<sup>th</sup> place, reflecting a very low level of corporate activity.

On Greenhouse Gas Management Activities Parameter IV, Suriname sat in last place (58<sup>th</sup>) as there were no recorded carbon offsetting activities or emissions reduction policies.
