---
layout: country
id: zm
title: Zambia
region: africa
grid: 'off'
published: true
---

Zambia’s hydro-dominated power sector is set to add solar plants to the mix to try to make up some of its generation deficit. In mid-2016, Zambia’s scaling solar programme attracted bids for 81.5MW which were amongst the lowest solar prices in sub-Saharan Africa. Following the successful closure of phase one, a second solar auction for 300MW open for prequalification in May 2017. These auctions have proved successful in a country struggling to attract private investment in power due to heavily subsidised tariffs. In a bid to become cost reflective, the government has promised to gradually increase tariffs out to 2019. But in a country where electricity access is only at 26%, tariff increases have caused controversy.

Zambia's power sector is in trouble. Hydropower accounts for 90% of the country’s 2.6GW capacity, which leaves it highly dependent on water levels at the country's dams. In recent years, water levels have been very low, drastically reducing hydro capacity. The power deficit meant that eight hours of load shedding per day in the capital was common in 2015 and 2016. Load shedding has abated in early 2017, partly due to good rainfall and higher water levels at the dams along the Zambezi River and due to the commissioning of the new 300MW Maamba coal power plant.

Still, the new plant alone won’t solve all the problems. There are further barriers to new capacity development. The main obstacle to development is heavily subsidised tariffs. Residential rates are at about $40/MWh, far below the cost of generation. The gap between cost of generation and recovered revenue means that the utility, the Zambia Electricity Supply Corporation (ZESCO), is not able to sign PPAs at a cost-reflective rate. This limits the utilities ability to bring large amounts of new capacity online.

The country has taken steps to ease the problems caused by drought and overreliance on hydropower. First, it developed the power station at Maamba. The first 150MW of this was commissioned in August 2016 and another 150MW came online later that year. A further 300MW coal plant is planned for the same site. Second, Zambia is buying emergency power from offshore ships in Mozambique – importing 500GWh in 2016. While this helps the country to supply electricity in the short term, it is expensive and unpopular with the public, so it’s not a long-term solution.

How will the capacity crunch be solved in the long term? The problem of low tariffs is widely acknowledged. Zambia’s regulator, the ERB, is undertaking a cost-of-service study to accurately measure the true cost of electricity. The study is expected to conclude in 4Q 2017. Following a cost-of-service study, the regulator is expected to raise tariffs. Higher tariffs will improve Zesco’s ability to sign PPAs for new generation. In his November 2016 budget speech, Minister of Finance, Felix Mutati, said it is the government’s intention to move towards cost reflective tariffs beginning in 2017.

The high cost of supply has not been helped by electricity supply contracts with the country’s mines. The government signed power purchase agreements with mining companies at highly subsidised tariffs. The mines consume 55 % of Zambia’s electricity. The government is trying to fix the problem: it raised tariffs unilaterally with one company and the issue is now in arbitration. It may seek to do the same with others. Further negotiations are expected once the cost-of-service report is complete.

Finally, there are also longer-term plans to plug the country’s capacity deficit with further hydropower and renewable energy investment. A 750MW hydropower plant has been planned at Kaufe Gorge lower. The project will be built by Sinohydro, and commissioning is expected in 2019. There are also early plans for the 2.4 GW Batoku Gorge hydropower plant. The plant on the Zambezi River would be a shared project with Zimbabwe.

A government development agency, the Industrial Development Corp. (IDC) , has started a programme to build 600MW of solar in three phases. The 'Scaling Solar program is backed by the International Finance Corp. Bids were accepted for the first phase of 81MW from two developers for 48MW and 34MW, respectively. The results yielded competitive prices – $60.2/MWh and $78/MWh, fixed for 25 years in dollar terms – from experienced developers NEOEN/First Solar and Enel Green Power, respectively. Phase II is for 200MW of solar capacity. In May, twelve developers were selected for pre-qualification – including the two winners of the phase one bid. The auction is expected to be held in 2017. The prices awarded in phase I are not indicative of the cost of developing new solar at a greenfield site in Zambia. This project received implicit subsidies. Bidders are granted land from the Zambian government and are eligible for debt from the IFC and OPIC.

Another program, called the renewable energy feed-in tariff, or 'Refit,' aims to procure 200MW of renewable capacity, in projects under 20MW. Although called a feed-in tariff, the programme will actually be run more like a competitive tender. Final capacity allocation is likely to be 100MW of small hydro and 100MW split between PV, geothermal or biomass. The first 50MW auctioned will be PV. The German development agency KfW has supported the regulator in creating a standardised PPA for the programme.

Zambia’s power sector is liberalised and private participants can get a licence for generation, transmission or supply. Licences and tariffs are controlled by the regulator, the Energy Regulation Board or ERB while the state-owned utility, Zesco, controls the majority of generation, transmission, distribution and retail. The current government committed to unbundling Zesco into three entities – generation, transmission and distribution. The Private Sector Development Association has expressed concern about this – particularly that it may increase inefficiency at Zesco.

Licences and tariffs are controlled by the regulator, the Energy Regulation Board or ERB. 
The Ministry of Energy and Water sets energy policy in the country. The Office of Promoting Private Power Investment is part of the ministry, and is responsible for identifying and tendering out sites for new power projects and overseeing unsolicited offers of development. Despite the existence of this organisation, the process for developing new privately owned power projects is quite convoluted and the pipeline is quite limited.

The IDC is a holding company set up by government that owns many public sector businesses and assets (including Zesco). Its mission is to get these companies into such shape that allows them to raise debt and eventually be privatized. IDC is chaired by the President of Zambia, Edgar Lungu, who mandated the Scaling Solar programme. It has a slightly unusual structure and remit but, as far as the solar procurement goes, it delivered the solar auction process in an unusually short time (supported by the International Finance Corp.). At this time, it doesn’t appear as though the IDC will develop further solar projects after the planned 600MW is deployed

Zambia is part of the Southern Africa Power Pool and trades energy with the other countries including – South Africa, Congo, Malawi, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Tanzania and others. In 2015, the shortfall across the pool was 8.2GW (compared to 47GW of operational capacity). There is plenty of demand in the pool, but Zambia will not be able to capitalise on this unless the country can dramatically expand its operational capacity. Early planning work and feasibility studies are under way on a number of interconnection projects which would link Zambia to DRC, Tanzania, Malawi and Mozambique. The OPPPI is seeking private investment partners for these projects.

Zambia’s levels of access to energy are low: 74% of people live without access to electricity. The Rural Electrification Agency (REA) is charged with raising rural energy access from 3.1% in 2003 to 51% in 2030, under a masterplan finalised in 2008. National access is about 26% today and the REA estimates 4.4% in rural areas. The government estimated that REA would require $50m/year to meet its 2030 goals. Unfortunately, the Agency is hugely underfunded, receiving approx. $12.3m in the 2016 budget. There is a lot of commercial interest in the off-grid market – several companies are selling solar lanterns, home systems and products at different sizes and price points.

Zambia is a signatory to the UNFCCC Paris Agreement (albeit a few months later than most of the other nations). In its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC), it committed to a total emissions reduction of 38 mega tonnes CO2(eq), or 47%. It estimates a budget of $50 billion by 2030 to meet these goals, with $35 billion of this coming from external sources. The three pillars of its plan are sustainable forest management, sustainable agriculture and renewable energy and energy efficiency. The Interim Inter-Ministerial Climate Change Secretariat has responsibility for co-ordinating climate change adaptation and mitigation efforts in the country and is part of the Ministry of Finance.
